Welcome to this tutorial where we're going to examine how you can package or transform
or convert your Python code into a command line tool. My name is Jeroen. I already got
a great introduction so we can keep this brief. A lot of the material today is based on a
book I wrote a couple of years ago, Data Science at the Command Line, which you can read for
free. If you go to my website, you can easily find that book. A couple of months ago, another
book that I wrote came out together with Thijs. What's good to mention is that we're giving
away 25 signed hard copies on Sunday. If you want to participate in the raffle, you can
go to this URL or scan the QR code. If you then fill in your first name and your email
address, then you get a chance to win a copy. The winners, the lucky winners, will be announced
at tomorrow end of day. That's polarsguy.com.pydata.london. For the next 90 minutes, we're not going to
be focusing on Polars. We're going to be focusing on that other technology which has
been around for a bit longer, the command line. I'm not going to explain why you should
use the command line. The fact that you're here pretty much shows that you are already
convinced that the command line is a wonderful way of working, very complementary to using
an IDE or a programming language. One of the beautiful things about the command line
is that you can very easily extend it. You can create your own tools. There are already
a lot of tools available. Even if you just install a Linux distribution or if you have
Mac OS, there are, I'd say, about 100 tools already at your disposal. Then there are thousands
more tools available to you. New tools are being written every day. The good thing is
that it's actually not that hard to write your own. That's what we're going to be looking
at today. I really believe that if you're able to create your own tools, that they'll
eventually, or actually immediately, make you more efficient and productive and effective.
That's, of course, a good thing. Because the command line has been around for so long,
I think I have another slide about this too. Because it's been around for over 50 years,
we can safely say that it's going to be around for the rest of your career. I hope it will
be a long and prosperous career. And there will be many, many tools, many programming
languages will come and go. Plenty of JavaScript frameworks. But there's this one technology
which is going to be sticking around for a very long time, and that is the command line.
So this is roughly what we're going to be covering today. First of all, I want to make
clear what is it that we're actually talking about when we say CLI. Then the interface.
How do you design your next tool? And there are two components to that. On the one hand,
arguments and options and switches. And on the other hand, how do you deal with streams,
streams of data? Then we're going to go into the fundamentals. How can you transform an
existing piece of Python code into something that is usable from the command line? In six
easy steps. Then I'll show you how you can upgrade from that, you know, the fundamental
way of doing things using either R parse, Python module, or Typer, a relatively new
Python package that you can use to easily build modern command line tools. We'll have
a look at UV and how you can use it to create self-contained tools. And along the way, I'll
share some best practices. This is a tutorial, and I really want to encourage you to ask
questions along the way, right? So this is your opportunity to extract as much information
as you want from me. We can, you know, I've prepared plenty of slides, I have some exercises,
I really want this to be interactive. So any question is encouraged and welcome. All
right then, what are we talking about here? We're talking about this. We're talking about
the Unix command line. So if you're running either Mac OS or a Linux distribution, the
most popular one being Ubuntu, then you're good. If you're currently running on just
Windows, that's not enough, right? Windows does offer, you know, two types of command
lines, but they're, you know, a different breed of command line interfaces. So if you
want to follow along today and you're running Windows, you have two options. You can either
install Windows subsystem for Linux, WSL, or you can use Docker and use a Docker image
that has a Linux distribution on it. And at the end of this presentation, there are links
to this, or actually also in the description of this tutorial on the PyData website in
the schedule, there are links to, you know, how you can follow, links to instructions
and how you can either install WSL or use a Docker image. Right. Is Git Bash going to
do the same thing? That's a good point and it might actually be good, good enough. If
it works, it works. Great. Yes. So thank you very much for mentioning that. If you have
Git Bash installed, then that works as well. Thank you. We're not going to be talking about
textual user interfaces or TUIs. They're great, right? Here we have LazyGit, for example,
but they are a very different approach. They're more like applications that, you know, are
running in your terminal, but they're a very different approach than working with command
line tools. If you are interested in this and you are interested in creating a TUI using
Python, then I can recommend you check out the textual package. All right. Let's have
a look. So this, right. We're at the command line. I guess we want this to be a little
bit larger. Yeah. Is the text large enough for everybody to read? You don't see anything?
Maybe I'm mirroring just, that's odd. So if I were to go back to, let me see here.
So you do see this. And if I were to do this and then this, you still don't see it. So
it appears that I'm only mirroring a specific application. Sorry about that. Just give me
a second here to choose window or app. All right. Mirror all application windows. Excellent.
Thank you. Yes. I mean, sorry. Oh, no, no, please. Yeah. So I have indeed spent some
time on customizing my environment, my prompt. And please don't be intimidated or anything.
This is totally not needed for today. Yeah. If you are interested in this, we can talk
about this after today's tutorial. Yeah. I'll be around for the rest of the day and the
entire conference actually. I'm always happy to talk about this. And I am working inside
Tmux, right, a terminal multiplexer so that I can easily switch between different windows
and panes. Sorry. Oh, bigger. Yes. Thank you for saying that. How about this? Is this
big enough? Yeah. I see a thumbs up. Right. Thank you. And if at any point, you know,
it's still too small, just let me know. Okay. Okay. Yes. I was going to show you this script,
right? What was it? Yes. I'm going to be running a script called greet simple.
There we are. This is the output of that script, right?
What does the script look like? Let's have a look here.
So this is not a command line tool. This is just a very small Python script. Yeah. It opens up
names.txt. And then for every name that is in this file, it will, you know, print it out along
with a greeting. Yes. This is what names.txt looks like. Yeah. Just 10 random names.
As simple as this is, right, it's not so much that it's simple. What it represents is it's a script
that may very much be like something you have created in the past. Yeah. So it is something
that we can turn into a command line tool. Yeah. Using a couple of steps. But there are certain
aspects here that need to change. For example, there are some hard-coded values in here,
such as the file name or such as the greeting. And it doesn't offer any, so it doesn't offer
any flexibility. It also doesn't provide any help. You know, things that we come to expect from a
command line tool. Yeah. So what we're going to do today is turn this into something that we can
actually call a command line tool. It can be run from the command line already, but only because
I invoked Python, which then interpreted this script. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Sorry.
Here we go.
Yeah. I already said this. It's going to be around for a long time. Trust me.
So when I say command line tool, yeah? This is frustrating.
Add windows.
Right. Let's just leave it at that.
Like this. Or like this. Okay. Sorry about this. Hopefully from now on it will be all right.
So command line tool. It's an umbrella term. We have a variety of different tools and how
they're implemented. Yeah? We can have simple aliases or shell functions defined in our
configuration file, or we can even have scripts that are compiled and so binary executables.
We're going to be looking at interpreted scripts, right? Because of course today
our language of choice is Python. Yeah? And I believe that this really hits a sweet spot
when it comes to creating your own tools. They give you all the flexibility you need
from a programming language and still all the power, maybe not the speed, but still all the
power from a binary executable. And a lot more flexibility than a small shell function or alias
provides. Yeah? But the good thing is, and you might already be aware of this, is that the command
line itself doesn't really care in which language a script is programmed in. Yeah? As long as you
adhere to certain standards. Yeah? It doesn't matter whether it's in Bash or Python or Rust.
We do see more and more command line tools being implemented in Rust. Yeah? That's a very welcome
thing. But this also means is that you can easily combine tools written in different
programming languages. Yeah? So if you want to take a polyglot approach for whatever reason,
maybe you're working with a team that works in another language. Yeah? Then this is a way to do
that using the command line. So. And then there's this other part of the so-called Unix philosophy.
Yeah? Is that most tools, most, not every tool, they do one thing. But they do it really well.
Yeah? Because you can string these tools together that gives you a lot of flexibility. You can solve
many, many different problems that way. So keep that in mind as you are designing your next command
line tool. So you shouldn't try to implement everything in your own tool. It's good to be
aware of the existing tools that are already out there. Yeah? So these can be features that the
shell provides, such as piping or reading from a file, writing to a file, or globbing. Yeah? So
finding multiple files using some pattern. Or command line tools such as cat curl for downloading
things. Yeah? If your command line tool downloads something in order to process it, you may want to
consider, like, hey, how about I just rip that out of my tool and let curl them do the work so that
it can pipe its output to my input. Yeah? So that requires a little bit of a different way of thinking.
Yeah? So in other words, stay in your lane. Try to focus on what your tool needs to do well.
So here we are with our very first exercise. Don't worry, it's not a coding exercise. This is a pen
and paper and a thinking exercise. Although with coding, I do think that, you know, we still do a
little bit of thinking, right? So pen and paper. I would like you to think about what your next
command line tool could be. So try to remember something that you have created in the past,
try to remember something that you have created in the past, whether that was a helper script
or a one-off notebook. Does it contain something that can be generalized, right? If you strip out
all of the hard-coded values. So what was a particular task that you may be, that you
have to do every so often or that you may be needing to do in the future? And then let's
think about how you can turn it into a command line tool. And I know we haven't talked about
the interface just yet. For now, I just want you to think about, is there already something out there
that you have created that you can use? And if you cannot really come up, can come up with something,
that's all right. Maybe you can think of a tool that you may want to be designing.
Is there something in your work or otherwise that requires some tasks that you cannot
really comfortably do using the existing command line tools already out there?
So that might be a gap, an opportunity for you to write your own command line tool.
So I'm going to give you a couple of minutes for that. So pen and paper or make notes on your laptop
to think about what your next tool could be.
Pen and paper or make notes on your laptop to think about what your next tool could be.
Try to focus on your exercise, I'll try to focus on this setup that I've never encountered
before, these issues. I guess I said all of these things, right?
not for everybody but more to your personal setup at the moment. Now would
also be a good time, either Thijs or myself might be able to help you, whether
that's regarding your setup or any other question that you have.
Yeah, you want me to come over or do you think it's a, would you like me to come
over or Thijs?
Okay
I have this repost from my work. It's a mix of a Quarto doc that then builds the GitHub Markdown. This is the Python script and I was thinking to make this into a standalone tool and it would take these parameters like a vehicle.
Wonderful. Yes. So ideally my co-workers could use it rather than me having to run it all the time. That would be my basic idea. That sounds wonderful. Yeah, excellent. Yeah, that is great, great.
All right, let's continue. Don't worry if you're still thinking or writing. Okay, so
you have a tool in mind. We don't know yet what it's going to look like but
that will come in a moment. Let's talk about how we can design the
interface of our next command line tool. Like I said, the interface is roughly
based on two aspects. On one hand we can give our tool arguments, also
known as options and switches and flags, and on the other hand we can let our
tool deal with streaming input or input and output and error messages. So
let's first focus on those arguments. Now, there are a lot of terms here
when it comes to those arguments and various sources use different lingo.
But this is what I believe to be the case. So here we have one example.
This git commit command. Now, git is what is the command. Commit, in this
case, is the subcommand. Dash v, which stands for for Bose, is an option.
Or, no, it's a switch. You see, it doesn't really matter what we
call these things. Just know that, you know, sometimes they are called options
or switches or flags. I believe because this particular one, so dash v,
doesn't take any arguments, any parameters, it can be known as a flag or
a switch. And then dash m would be an option. And in this case, yeah, dash m,
well, they're both optional, yeah, but you can have optional arguments or required
arguments. And so everything besides git itself, you know, git is
the command, and all of them are arguments, yeah. So that is the
top-level name for all of these things. And to demonstrate that, I've created a
very small tool that we can run from the canal line. Yes, you see this. Fantastic.
Yeah, so we have here print args.py. So, well, we can, I guess we can mimic what
was there. And what it prints is a list, a list of strings. Text is the
universal interface on a command line, so all the arguments that you give are just
strings. If you need to treat them differently, you may need to do some extra
work, especially when you're using, yeah, the built-in functionality that we're
going to start with in a moment, yeah. Other modules and packages may be able
to do some work for you. The very first value in this list, known as argv,
is the name of the tool, the command that you used. So if there was an alias, yeah,
that was pointing to this tool, we would know. That would be, that name would then
appear as the first value in this list. So we have commit, we have dash v, dash m,
and then fixed hypo is one value because I used quotes, yeah. If I didn't use those,
they were, they would be, you know, separate, separate values.
Yeah. What's interesting, by the way, is that I can also show you, let's say,
so what I did here, the very last argument is, I used something here called command
substitution. This is a feature that your shell, the dash or the z-shell or fish,
yeah, takes care of. So this is not something that your tool has to do, yeah.
It's great. Same as with, with globbing. If I don't use globbing, I don't need to
Yeah, it's great. Same as with, with globbing. If I were to do star dot or asterisk dot pi,
we would get all the file names as separate arguments.
That's neat, huh? That's neat. It's good to know something that you,
it's already functionality that you don't have to worry about.
So, oh, wait, I guess I can show you the code. Oh, it's already up here. Fantastic. Yeah.
So a very short piece of code. It just preprints the argv value. So arg values.
What are the arguments passed to this script?
And I'll explain later what this very first line is. It's crucial. It's crucial.
It's crucial. It's crucial for creating a command line tool yourself,
for any command line tool, really.
So we use sys.argv in this case. This is as low level as you can get.
Just a list of command line arguments. If you want to do any fancy things,
then if you want to support both short and long options, if you want to do any
verification, then those are things that you have to do yourself.
So that might be a lot of work. But if you're creating a tool that creates
zero, one, or two, or that needs zero, one, or two arguments, then I would say that's fine.
If this tool is for your purposes only, and I would say that's 99% of the tools that I expect
you to create, then it's fine to use argv. So the first element is the script name,
and the remaining elements are arguments. And another reason why it's good to be
aware of this is that the other solutions that we're going to be looking at,
the arc parse module and typer, or maybe you want to use click instead,
or something else that I've never heard of,
all of these Python solutions, they still use argv under the hood.
So when it comes to options that you can use for your next command line tool,
there are certain conventions out here. And a lot of tools, not all of them, there are always
exceptions. I mean, that happens when something has been around for that long. There are always
exceptions. But it is generally understood that these short and long options, they're common.
They're common conventions here. So when it comes to providing help, you would provide
both the short option dash h or the long option dash dash help.
I'm not going to be listing them all. So they're more for you to
consult as a reference as you are when we go to the next exercise.
So dash f if you want to specify a file or if you, you know, just take a moment to look at these.
And again, there are always exceptions. I would say that, you know, with the next exercise,
don't go overboard. It's not necessary to have all of these implemented. And I would say
the fewer, the better.
So when it comes to output, outputting something in JSON is very popular these days.
Maybe you want to generate some configuration file automatically. I don't know.
That you can first inspect in some format or maybe, you know, output it as JSON when you want
to save that. I don't know. Just making this up. And now it's your turn to make things up.
So I want you to think about the arguments that your next command line tool will get.
So try to think about, okay, what is their purpose?
Do they change a setting that is crucial? So are they required or are they actually optional?
Do you want to control the amount of logging that your tool is going to produce?
So optional or required. Yeah, just think about it. And try to come up with a couple of invocations.
Does your tool need subcommands? It's fancy, right? I mean, something like Git has a lot of
subcommands. But is that really something that your tool is going to need in order to get the job done?
Yeah, something to think about. Again, I'm going to give you a couple of minutes to just brainstorm about this.
Again, I'm going to give you a couple of minutes to just brainstorm about this.
Of course. Shall I come over? Or is it a general question? Good.
All right. Yeah. Okay. So what are my thoughts when it comes to short options and long options?
So Go violates, I would say, the convention that for long options you use two dashes.
And I think that it's not a common thing. It's an exception, I would say.
So I'm not a big fan of that, personally. No. So what happens then? So these short options,
many tools allow you to merge short options together. So you would use one dash,
and then you can have a couple of letters. And they would each be short options that you could
provide separately. So for example, tar-xzvf. I read that xkcd comic just this morning to
remember the arguments to tar. You can paste them together. But how does Go then handle that
when also long options only need a single dash? Yeah. So yeah. Good point. But so this is, again,
like I said, there are always exceptions to whatever we're discussing today.
All right. Shall we move on? Yes. In a way, command line tools are kind of like functions.
Yeah. Why do we use functions in our code? Well, to abstract away some complexity. Yeah. And
functions can take zero, one, or more arguments so that you give them some flexibility,
that they do one thing and do it well, hopefully. Right? But there is at least one thing that sets
command line tools apart from your Python functions. And that is that each process
in a Unix-like system has three standard streams available.
And again, it's all text. Yeah. That's the universal interface. So if you want to output
numbers or if you want to ingest numbers from some other tool or from a file, you need to
do some work there. But that's a necessary thing in order to make this a general interface that
always works. So there are three standard streams. Standard because they're always available.
Standard input, standard output, and standard error, abbreviated often as stdin, stdout,
and stdir. Not every tool uses these. Your tool may not need it, right? But that's something that
we're going to think about in a moment. For example, pwd, print working directory,
doesn't need your input. It just prints out the current working directory.
And if you haven't done anything special, it will be printed to the screen.
Rev can read from or does read from standard input. It reverses. It inputs line by line.
And if you haven't done anything special, then it will read from the things that you type.
It's attached to your keyboard input. So let me demonstrate this.
So I'm just typing rev here. And you see this cursor? It's not doing it. There's no output.
It's waiting for input to come in via the standard input stream. So if I type something,
it reverses it. No, wait, that doesn't seem to work. Good, it does work. Line by line. And also,
so I input a line, and I output a line, and then it immediately outputs, right? But if I were to say
pass in my list of 10 names, it will read from that instead. Yeah? And similarly, I can
redirect the output to a file, say, names rev.txt.
You see no more output to the screen, but it's redirected to the screen.
You see no more output to the screen, but it's redirected to this file. And similarly,
instead of redirecting to a file, we can pipe our output to another tool,
which then reads from its standard input. And you know, that is the beauty of the command line,
is this flexibility to solve a big puzzle, right, by combining all these pieces together
in various ways. And I would like you to, in a moment when we do the third exercise,
I would like you to think about this as well. Yeah? Is your tool going to be really standalone?
Is it going to try to do everything itself? Or is it going to be making use of other tools
already available? And what are some of the tools that may want to consume its output?
Yeah, that's another way to think about it. Yeah, I pretty much covered this.
Yeah. Has anyone ever tried reading and writing to the same file in one pipeline? No? Yeah? No?
Well, you can't do it, so you shouldn't. If you do that, what happens is that the last process
that is supposed to write to a file, to the file that you're also reading from,
immediately opens it for writing, and thereby truncating the file. So the first process,
which might be the same one, starts with an empty file, and as a result, you just delete your data.
Yeah? But there is a solution. There is this, you can either write to a different file first,
and then rename that, of course, or there is this tool called Sponge,
which is not installed by default, but Homebrew has it, and it's also, you know,
other package. You can very much, it's part of more utils.
Yes. So, third exercise. Again, not a coding exercise, although you're welcome to code if you
want to. I want you to think about these streams. Your command line tool, your next command line
tool, it, I guess it operates on some data, right? It's what it often does.
This data, is this always coming from, or do you really care where this data comes from?
Yeah? Or would you be happy to just get some text, right? And then let the user,
which may be yourself, figure out how to get that text, right? And then,
let the user, which may be yourself, figure out how to get that text, whether that's a local file
or something that you download, or maybe you use a command line tool to first extract some
data from a database that then gets outputted to standard output that your tool can then read as
standard input or from standard input, right? I would like you to think about that. So,
we have three standard streams available to us. Which ones are you going to need?
You know, in some tools, the arguments and the streams, they sort of interact. As in,
if you specify an input file, right, for a lot of tools that I've come across,
if you specify an input file, it will not read from standard input. Yeah? There are tools that,
if you don't specify anything, they just wait, right? Like we just saw with REB,
or there are tools that just error. And the same holds for outputting, right? Are you happy to
output to standard output so that you give other tools the flexibility to process that output even
further? Or do you really want to write to a file, maybe because it's a binary format of some sort?
All right. I think that's enough time to think about streams. We're also halfway this tutorial,
so I suggest that we take a quick break. You know, today's actually my birthday.
Thank you. Thank you. Yes. It's been a hell of a ride. Now, to celebrate this, I brought
Stroopwafels from the Netherlands. And I hope I have enough Stroopwafels. But if you would like
one, you're very welcome to come over here and grab one. So let's take a five-minute break,
stretch your legs, go to the restroom, whatever, eat a Stroopwafel, and then we'll reconvene.
Stroopwafel. That's right. Stroopwafel.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Yeah. I brought 72. So I was told that the maximum capacity was
66. So we'll see. We'll see how many are still here. Yeah. Of course. Yeah. Oh, that's good.
Because this is the process that we follow when planning, right? Yeah. My question is,
do you, when you go, when you're planning your next CLI tool, you probably go through these
thought exercises, right? Yeah, exactly. So is there any framework that you do to document it?
Or you just open a note and start writing? Yeah, that's usually it. These tools are often very
small. And they're mostly meant for yourself, to improve your own productivity, and to make life
on the command line just a little bit more bearable. And, and so it's very much ad hoc.
And then there's always room for improvement later on. Yeah. Because sometimes you think about
and then you start writing about how it should be. And then in my case, maybe you get
engaged with something else. And then you go back to that after a few weeks. And then you start,
okay, you retake your notes from that time and you start doing your code. Yeah. And then eventually
that you need to take some, something that you have written to make it your own documentation
for your future self. Yes. And that's why I generally advise against using ARGV, you know,
this bare bones approach, so that you can easily, more easily add, so that you can make your tool
self-documenting so that it has a help that you can then look into. Yeah, you're welcome.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly. All right. Cool. Yeah, thank you. Have a stroopwafel, if you like.
Hmm.
Is it going well? That's good to hear. We're halfway. Yeah, we're sort of halfway with our
slides. Man. Buttery smooth. Time flies.
Are more sessions coming before the next two, or just for one session?
I do just one session. One session, okay. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. I mean,
we just do one session. Okay. Let's walk around a little bit. Let's...
Hi.
Hey, thank you.
Happy birthday. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. You're enjoying the show? Yeah?
Thanks. That's good to hear.
Oh, good. And if you think they're general questions, then by all means. I mean,
it's very likely that someone else has a similar question. So, yeah, always good.
Have you heard this? Do you know? That's what we're going to use.
Yeah, so does it mention PEP723? I think so. Or maybe not yet, because this was in December 2024.
I'm not sure if that's it. Okay, yeah. It might be, but yes, definitely. Yeah,
so we're on the bleeding edge. Yes. Hey, thank you.
Yeah.
Yes.
Okay, let's get going then.
Yeah.
And I'll show you.
Yes.
Yeah.
All right, let's continue.
So, so far we've talked mainly about concepts. Yeah? And that's actually what I care most about.
Syntax itself is not that exciting. Those are things you can look up
or even let some LLM do for you. Now, I'm, you know, what I really want you to take home
are the underlying concepts. But I also want you to know how to proceed. So,
we're going to look at some concrete steps now in how to turn that very simple Python script,
greet-simple.py, how we can turn that into a command line tool.
So, we're going to use very, very basic steps for this. Yeah? So, we're going to copy,
copy the existing code. It's a bit, a bit, maybe, you know, obvious, but maybe you have your code
in a notebook or a quarto markdown file or, you know, you need to just extract some portion of
a larger code base. So, we're first going to make sure that we have the required code in a
separate file. That's our very first step. Then, again, we're going to think about the arguments.
Yeah? So, this is an exercise that you already did, and now we're also going to do this for
this particular script. We're going to be thinking about, okay, the standard input.
Or is there, are there other streams that we want to make use of? Then, as a fourth step,
we're going to be looking at the very first line, the shebang line that our interpreted scripts
could really use in order to start using them as a proper command line tool. I'll explain a little
bit about, you know, making your code executable by changing the permission bits. And then, lastly,
I'll show you how to add, you know, how to change your search path so that it really feels
like a proper command line tool. Yeah? So, right now, I can imagine that you feel a little bit like
Alice in Wonderland tumbling down the rabbit hole, but let's just take the red pill,
and I'll show you how far this goes. Okay. Yeah. So, this tool, which you can already look at if
you have the GitHub repository open, that's our end state. Yeah? So, I'll walk you through the
steps, leave this open, sort of as our to-do list. Yeah? Or maybe let's do this, the
Great symbol. Yeah. All right.
Right. Yes. Let's just do this here. So, we have our starting position
and the final position where we want to go to now open next to each other. So, you've already seen
this one here on the left. That's our very basic script. It's not a command line tool yet because
it's not executable. We still need Python. It doesn't take any arguments. It doesn't read
from standard input. Right? So, those are the things that we're going to change. So,
I guess where to start? Well, we already copied it. So, I would say that step one is now taken
care of, argv. Where are we? Here. Yes, argv. Okay. So, we want to change the greeting. Yeah? So,
let me just cheat a little bit here and copy from this other file.
And I guess we also need to import the sys module over here.
And then in order to make use of that greeting, I'll just do greeting like this.
So, now let's save this. Now, what we can do is, so, it's not yet a proper command line tool.
You're right, but bear with me. Greet simple.py. And if I just, this is also how I ran it before.
Ran it before. Now, it just, it still works the same, but I can also pass in one argument
and then, hey, we have different output. So, we have now already added some flexibility
to this script and, you know, command line tool in the making.
Right? Any questions about this particular step? Yeah? Okay, good.
The third step. Right. Our current tool reads from names.txt and there's, that's a fixed value.
It's hard-coded. Yeah? So, we want this tool to take in, yeah, any data, right? Whether that
comes from the internet or a database or a local file, we want to be greeting everybody.
So, instead of, I guess, I guess I need to, I closed, yes, all right. So, Python, or greet
simple. Yeah, I shouldn't have closed that. Okay. But, so, instead of reading from names.txt,
well, so, this is also a file. It's just a special file here in our Unix-like environment.
And it's already open. So, we don't need to open this. It's already open. So, we can
immediately start iterating. But for our purposes, we can just treat it as a file. Yeah?
So, this looks about right. Now, instead of closing this, let me,
you see, I just, I didn't pass in any file. So, it's now blocking. It's waiting for standard
input. So, if I just say, hey, dice, just high dice. So, now, it behaves sort of what we also
saw with rev, right? It reads line for line from standard input and immediately outputs
the standard output. And they're both, you know, connected to the screen. But if I, right,
if I send an interrupt, I just did control C. So, with that, you send an interrupt,
and you get a warning. There are ways to make it exit nicely. But I can still now
pass in names.txt using the smaller than sign. Yeah? Or I could,
oh, no, it has to be this. Yes. Right? So, it doesn't matter whether they're numbers or lines
coming from a local file or some other process outputting something. Right? So, again, a lot
more flexibility now that we make use of the standard input. Fantastic. So, that brings us
to step number four. Oh, yeah, the shebang. You know, funny story. I once participated
in a beatboxing competition. I did that once and only once. And I had to come up with a stage name.
And I was, of course, already, you know, nerding out on the command line. So, I thought, like,
shebang. Sounds awesome. Sounds powerful. Of course, when I was announced,
it was pronounced as shebang. So, the shebang, the name, the term comes from these two characters,
the hash and the bang, the exclamation mark. Together, these are, you know, this particular
combination are a particular set of bits that instruct the shell that the remainder of this line
is the executable that should be interpreting the rest of the file.
I hope I got that correct. Does that make sense? So, here we have,
yeah, so, okay, so, there's a little bit of additional complexity here, because this is actually
the executable that is going to be interpreting this. User bin env. And it takes one argument
here, Python 3. So, all that this does, so, we can run this, we can say env, and we can
say Python 3, and it runs Python 3 regardless of where the executable Python 3 is on my system.
So, using user bin env makes your tool more portable. Because it might be that on someone
else's system, Python 3 is in a different location. So, this is not something that
you want to hard code. So, this is very common. User bin env, Python 3.
Okay. So, and then later, we're going to look at a different line when we start using UV and
PEP 723. Exciting stuff coming later. So, now that we have here, now that we have this,
let's save this, we no longer have to specify Python 3. Yeah? We can, well,
there's still a couple of steps that we need to do in order to make this feel like a true
command line tool. Yeah? It still says command not found. We're going to solve that in a moment.
Now it says permission denied. Okay. What's going on? This brings us to step number five.
Every file and every directory in a Unix-like system has certain permissions associated with
it. What is allowed? And currently, if we look at, let me see here.
If we have a look here at the files in our directory, then in the very left, we see,
yeah, rwx and some dashes. And these indicate the permission bits, the permissions that are
associated with each file and each directory. Yeah? So, when we go to greet simple, that's the
file we're currently working with, we don't see an X. So, we do not have the permission to execute
this file. So, we need to change this. And to do that, we need, we use chamod or change mode.
And there are some different ways to use this, but we're going to be
setting, we're going to be turning the permission bit or the execution permission bit, the X,
we're going to turn it on, which is the plus for the user. That's us.
So, the user is, we are now going to set the execution bit to one, yeah, for greet simple.
And if we're then going to check again, you can see that the permission bit is now,
or the execution bit is now set, because we do see an X here. And so, if we try to
run this. So, previously, we got permission denied. I'm going to try again. It works.
Right? And we noticed that we didn't need to specify Python 3, right, because of the shebang
line. We're almost there. I would say that in a lot of cases, this is sufficient. Yeah? But that
.slash, what's up with that? Yeah? That doesn't really feel like a real command line tool.
We never have to use that. The reason is, is that this file is in a directory, which is not on our
search path. Yeah? The search path is an environment variable, which is, that's a list of
directories, where the shell will look for your executable, when you use its name. So,
this is my current list of directories, right? Let me see if I can make this a little bit,
can I do this? Yeah. A long list of directories, where it's going to look for. And it's in,
it will stop the moment it has found an executable with the name that you used.
Yeah? So, the order matters. Our current directory is not in here. So, we can do two things to fix
this. We can either move our script to a directory that is in our search path. Yeah? And, or we can
add the current directory to our path. Yeah? So, both work. What I really like is to have a,
just one directory, somewhere in my home directory, maybe .bin or whatever,
it doesn't matter what you call it, a place where you store all your own command line tools,
and then just change your search path to add that one directory. So, it's a one-time setup,
and then you're done and you just have all your tools in one place.
For now, for this tutorial, I'm going to do it a little bit different. I'm going to add the
current directory to the search path. Where are we? We're over here. Yeah, so that's this. So,
I'm actually updating the environment variable path to be a combination of the existing value
of path and the current working directory. So, now, hopefully, fingers crossed,
I can say greetsimple.py. Excellent. And I can even do this one directory up,
although I still need the directory in front of here for the names.txt file.
Tutorial slash, and it still works. Excellent. It works. Let's go back. And you know what? There's
actually one more step that I like to do. We don't really need that extension. .py, that's not needed.
That's not needed in Unix or Linux. So, we can just get rid of it. We can say greet simple.
Nope, the other way around.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, we can say greet simple. Hi.
Oh, of course, because we're in that, please don't laugh.
Makes me nervous. No. Yeah, because we're now back again in our repository.
That's it. That's how you turn, even though it was just a simple script, how you can turn an
existing Python script into a reusable command line tool with arguments, with streams, and whatnot.
And it doesn't matter which approach you're going to use, whether that's the basic sys.argv,
or as we'll see in a moment, the argpars module or typer, or what have you. These steps are always
there. Are there any questions about these six or seven steps that I just performed in the back?
Oh, you know what? That's a solution I never thought about. You can, of course, in your...
So, the question was, is there any advantage to adding the script to a directory and
put it on your search path than to just using an alias? And I think that's the solution I
have never thought of before, but it's something you could do, is in your RC file, dash RC or
t-shell RC, create an alias and then use the absolute path, the full path, the full location
of that script. And is there a downside to that? I don't think so.
Although, you know, if you have... If you plan to create a couple of tools,
right, then you would need to create an alias for every single tool. And if you were to just
have them in the same directory, then it's only one directory that you have to add to your search
path. So, that's perhaps the difference, yeah. You could also symlink, yeah. So, it's kind of like
creating something extra into a directory that's already on your search path, yeah.
But there's another, that's another solution. Oh man, I'm learning so much today.
That's great. Any other questions?
That's right. Unless you're running this inside your Windows subsystem for Linux,
or Docker image, or git bash, yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, I know Windows is
a wonderful operating system for playing games. Moving on.
And yes, yes, Linux is getting better and better. Yes. Thank you, Steam, for that.
Sorry, I... Yes.
So, yeah. So, the question was, instead of a script, can we also run Jupyter notebooks from
the canal lines? I am not sure. So, you would be invoking Jupyter something. There might be some,
it might be some functionality that Jupyter then offers. So, you would be,
if I were to do that, I would probably wrap that into a short bash script, or an alias,
or a shell function, yeah, that would then call Jupyter. I don't know the actual invocation that
you would need, but it might be possible. Now, when it comes to notebooks, this week I started
playing with Marimo, a totally new way of working with notebooks. And these notebooks, they are
actual Python files. So, if you are looking for such an approach, where, you know, there is a
notebook that you can also run from the canal line, then I can recommend Marimo. And I guess,
if you search on YouTube for Marimo and Typer, then you'll most likely come across a video
created by Vincent Wamadam, who works at Marimo, and he actually explains how to do this. It's
pretty neat, pretty neat. Thank you. Oh, yes, and then there was one...
Yeah, exactly. Okay, good question. So, in the tools that we just created,
the tool, all the arguments are positional, whereas before I've been talking about short
options and long options. What's up with that? Yeah, so that is something that argv,
because it's so basic, it does not provide this functionality. If you want that, and you're still
using argv, then you need to build this yourself. I wouldn't do that, if I were you. I would use
either the argpars module or the Typer package. So, and that's what I wanted to show next. So,
thank you very much for that question. I also see that we have about 10 minutes left.
Let's see what we can do here to make it fit. Right, so, so far, we've been using argv. Now,
there is a built-in module, right? So, it's part of the Python standard library called argpars.
And this gives you a ton of flexibility when it comes to defining your command line arguments.
It can automatically generate help. You can denote whether your arguments should be optional
or required. It can do some post-processing. If you indicate, like, hey, this is a Boolean,
you actually can use it as a Boolean instead of first parsing that string.
Handles short and long options. Yeah. And it's, you know, let's have a quick look
at what that might look like. Again, this is our greeting script, but now
there's a lot more code. See here, these first, you know, lines over here, that's me
setting up argpars, right? Instructing argpars. Okay, what arguments do we, does this script
accept? Again, it uses argv under the hood, yeah? But it, yeah, it does a lot of work for you.
So, I recommend that you try this out. It's a lot more convenient. And if you have, yeah,
more than, especially more than two arguments, I can definitely recommend,
you know, moving on from argv and using argpars. Or use Typer, which is a relatively new
Python package created by Sebastian Ramirez, the person behind FastAPI. This is a very modern
way of declaring your command line interface, so to speak. Built on top of Click, which is,
you know, and Click, you know, as we know, as I told you, it also uses argv under the hood.
The main difference is that with Typer, you use type hints. And from that, it generates
your interface and the help associated with it. And it is generally a lot less code
than if you were to use argpars. Let's have a quick look at that.
Again, it's our greeter application.
And you can see here, I have a function main with some arguments, like functions have. But now,
and these are, right.
Oh, right. So this one, I should update the repo. There's now a better way of doing this. Sorry,
don't worry. But what I want you to focus on right now is, it's not so much the code itself,
but just, you know, the takeaway here is that Typer uses type hints. And this function is still
usable as a regular Python function. And that is not the case when you use Click. Click really
changes the signature of the function. So that is one advantage of Typer. See, so that's a lot
less code than if you were to use argpars. Now, that's Typer. But what is this here at the top?
This is super awesome. This here is recently approved PEP 723, which allows you to specify
dependencies inside the script itself, right? So the syntax, you know, is perhaps a little bit
weird. You have to start with three slashes, script, and then it's something that looks like
pyproject.toml. You know, you'll get used to it. And uv, you know, this new tool to handle your
packages can help with this. I have links in the presentation at the very end. But this allows you
to make your tool standalone. And this is definitely a good thing when you use external
dependencies. You can specify the Python version that your tool needs and any other external
dependencies go in here, in between these brackets. And there is at least one, which is
Typer itself. But also if your tool uses, say, the requests library or pollers, yeah, it works. And if
you then, because we now use a slightly different hashbang line, so it's no longer Python, which
runs this code. No, it's uvrun. It detects whether you have these packages, these dependencies
already installed. And if not, it will do so. Making it, making, yeah, the ability to share this
script with others all the more easy. Let me see if I can quickly demonstrate this.
Great. Typer. Oh, yeah, let me first show that. Oh, that's probably because my path in this
particular session was not updated. Wow, look at this. It's beautiful. That's the help auto-generated
by Typer. And normally, if you would run this script, this tool, for the very first time,
you will see that it installs some packages. Now, this was not shown here because I already
had these packages installed because I already ran it. So it's being run in its own
virtual environment. Yeah? These packages are not installed globally. This process
gets its own virtual environment. Pretty cool. And I think in the repo, I've included two
examples that are, yeah, a bit bigger, or three, actually. There's the analyze tool,
both an art parse version and a Typer version. There's also sample.py, which is something that
I created a long time ago that I actually needed. It's being used in the book Data Science at the
command line, just to give you another example of how a more elaborate command line tool may
look like. Yeah? So these two analyze scripts, they also use subcommands. Two minutes to go?
No. You can have a look at these scripts yourself. Yeah, there's some best practices
for you to review. I don't have time now to go over all of these, although some of them have
been mentioned along the way, some anti-patterns as well that you want to avoid. And so this is
your take-home exercise, right? It's to start building, and preferably as soon as possible,
because otherwise, you know, you will have forgotten all about this. And if you have built
something, I would love to hear from you. If you have any other questions after this tutorial,
you know, I want to hear from you. So with that, I want to thank you very much for attending this
tutorial. I think you've made the right choice, right? These 90 minutes, they're going to benefit
you for the rest of your career. Yeah? So again, thank you very much. Enjoy the rest of the
conference.